I'm Chris Espinosa.
If you were at the earlier session,
the AppleScript overview session,
you've heard a lot from me.
If I press the forward button
and the machine just bings,
what does that mean?
This session is going to be a lot
different than the overview this morning.
This is a very code-oriented session.
If you are looking to learn
how to script in AppleScript,
now would be a fine time
to debark this aircraft.
We are going to be
talking about C++ code.
We're going to be talking about classes.
We're going to be talking about
a lot of things that are only of
interest to people who are writing
applications that want to be scriptable.
If you are a scripter,
don't hurt yourself by
trying to listen to me.
Go to www.apple.com/applescript and
download some of Sal Sehgoyen's very,
very fine AppleScript guidebook
modules on how to write AppleScripts.
For those of the rest of you,
if you want to learn how to make a
scriptable application in C or C++,
you're in the right place.
Good.
What you're going to learn in this
session is why there are relatively
few good scriptable applications
on the Macintosh platform,
because it's hard.
There are a lot of bad scriptable
applications on the Macintosh
platform because it's easier to
make a bad scriptable application
than a good scriptable application.
Frameworks can help.
Frameworks can help by doing
a lot of the work for you.
Frameworks can hurt.
Frameworks can hurt because you
assume they're doing a lot of the
work for you when they're not.
So we're going to tell what it does for
you versus what you have to do yourself.
We're going to talk a
lot about PowerPlant.
There has been a very good
PowerPlant solution out there.
Greg Dow put a lot of work
into making some good scripting
classes in PowerPlant.
And it's the most widely
distributed and widely used
application framework for Macintosh.
So we're going to be
focusing a lot on that.
And then we'll be covering
some alternatives.
One of the alternatives I want to
stress is a relatively new one,
which DTS put up just last
week as the More OSL package.
If you're familiar with More Files,
More Apple Events, More Toolbox from DTS,
which basically fills in for
developers the functionality that
developers want in the OS that
the OS designers didn't put there,
well, this is another in that long
and esteemed series of software
codebases that does just that.
DTS has done a wonderful job
of responding to what the most
frequently asked developer gripes
about how to write scriptable
applications are and filling that in
in a very coherent and manageable way.
It's a great piece of work,
and I'm going to be
walking you through that.
Let's start with some background,
because I know that some
of you are approaching
scriptability for the first time.
AppleScript and the
Open Scripting Architecture,
OSA, is a way for a high-level language,
a user-written script,
to send events to applications
so that applications can act on
those events and execute them.
And the biggest problem that we find,
the biggest sin that is committed,
is applications that simply
expose a flat programmer's
API to the scripting language.
A whole lot of events and
not a lot of information.
Because what we've found over the
years with what is popular with
scripters in AppleScript is that
they don't just want to send a
bunch of events to applications.
They want to get and set
information within that application.
And the information they
want to get and set is the
information on the user's model,
the conceptual model of the
information inside that application.
Rather than clicking a checkbox or
pushing a button or choosing a menu item,
they want to get the value of something
or they want to create a new user
object somewhere in the document.
It's not, you know,
an automation like a macro maker
or a playback or recording.
It's more like we want to make queries
on the data in your application,
make intelligent decisions
based on that data,
and then do something
that manipulates the data,
not manipulating the application.
Because most of the really,
really good process automation
and workflow solutions that are
built using AppleScript are very,
very data-driven, not command-driven.
And this is why the object
model is so important.
And what is the object model?
The object model is the way that
OSA languages access the user-visible
information in your application.
And it applies a human terminology
to the programmatic elements
inside your application.
The two biggest things people do is, one,
is that they just provide an event
interface and no object interface
so that the users can't see the
objects because of all these events.
And two is that they fail to
give human names to the objects
within their applications and
just basically propagate the C++
identifiers up to the scriptor levels.
And that's confusing to people.
An object is-- can be,
but is not necessarily-- your
concept of a programmatic
object inside your application.
If you look at the model view
controller paradigm for developing
an object-oriented application,
what we're really talking
about is the model.
We're not talking about the view.
We're not talking about how
it's drawn on the screen.
And we're not talking about the
controller-- how it's manipulated.
We're talking about the
existence of the object and the
properties that that object has.
Those properties can be read and set,
preferably from the scripting language.
It's of a designated class,
so it can be told apart from
other things of that class.
And that class may be in a hierarchy,
and it can share some things or
inherit some things from other classes.
It can be a container of other objects,
like a window can contain data elements,
or a folder can contain files,
or a page can contain graphs.
Graphic objects or a paragraph
can contain words or characters.
And it can be contained
by other objects as well.
We script objects,
and the best scriptable applications
are those that use as few verbs
as possible to script all of the
objects in your applications.
That's a subjective statement,
but I lay claim to it.
The way that AppleScript and
OSA languages designate to your
application what they're trying to
act on is through this structure
called an object specifier.
And an object specifier is possibly the
most heinous data structure you're going
to come across in Macintosh programming.
It can be incredibly complex.
It can be vague and ambiguous.
It can be very detailed
in inappropriate places.
And there are 247 different variants
that you have to special case
to make sure that when somebody
sends you an object specifier,
you understand really what
they're talking about.
Because what it does is it drills
down from the top level of your
application down to a specific piece
of data in your application and can
get there through multiple routes.
And you don't necessarily have to
have a strict containment tree.
So it can really go through
pretty bizarre ways.
Let me show you,
I'll show you a little later how complex
and how weird object specifiers can be.
The way you get an object
specifier is as an Apple event
record that is deeply nested.
It's going to look on the top level like,
"Oh, this is easy.
It's an Apple event record with
four parts to it." But then one of
those parts is an object specifier
which has four parts to it,
which can be an object specifier
that has four parts to it.
And it can go on, down, and down,
and down.
The four parts are basically
the container of the object,
that's the from part,
the type of data that's being requested,
which is the want,
how to select a value from the container,
which is the key form,
and we'll be talking
a lot about key forms,
and then using that key form,
which one to pick.
So if I say I want folder
one of startup disk,
that's basically from is startup disk,
want is a folder,
form is by absolute position.
And then the other part is the
data that's being requested,
which is the want.
So that's the from part.
The type of data that's being requested,
which is the want.
How to select a value from the container,
which is the key form,
and we'll be talking
a lot about key forms,
and then using that key form,
which one to pick.
So if I say I want folder one
of and selection data is one.
That's a fairly simple object specifier,
but they can be more complex.
For example, the object specifier,
the modification date of file 2 through
file 4 of folder applications of startup
disk is nested kind of like this.
In the top level on the outside,
you're looking for the property.
You want a property.
The selection is the
code for that property,
which is the modification date.
And the container is,
you want the property of a file.
So the next thing is,
you want a file selected
by the key form range.
The key form range is going
to make two parts come.
You want the selection data,
which itself is a record
with a start and a stop,
and the start's going to be,
you want form index,
you want a file from the
current container index 2,
and the stop is going,
you want a file index,
that's actually wrong,
that should be index 4.
See how easy it is to make a mistake?
So you want start at 2,
stop at 4 from the current container,
and then the last thing,
the from goes all the way
down to the bottom there,
and is by name, the selection, a folder,
the selection data is, quote,
applications from the startup disk.
And the startup disk's container is null,
which means it's rooted at the app,
it's a from an Apple script.
And then this is a parameter to an event,
which can be, get the modification date,
set the modification date,
or this could be just a clause in a,
you know, delete every file,
who's modifying it,
who's modification date, you know,
et cetera.
So, it's, object specifiers can
be arbitrarily complex,
and if you tried to write
code yourself to parse this,
you'd go fairly nuts.
I know, because people have.
Here are the basic key forms.
One of the reasons is the
combinatorial problems of all of
your containers against all of your
objects versus all of the key forms.
And so, before you go into that,
you really need to know
what the key forms are.
The most familiar one
is by numeric index,
file one, first page.
That's the form absolute position.
And the selection data you're
going to get is usually an integer,
which is very nice.
Now, one of the things to remember is
that you are in control of this.
So you can be expecting any selection
data you want in form absolute position.
So you could make form absolute
position any arbitrary thing.
You could make it a string.
As long as it identifies
what you're talking about,
AppleScript will tend to do that
in the form absolute position.
If you say window quote untitled
or folder quote preferences,
that's going to trigger
the by name key form,
form name.
And your selection data for
that is usually a string.
And it's usually going to be
a string in the system script.
We don't have Unicode
selection yet for that,
so it's going to be a
string in the system script.
Those are the two main ones.
And if all you support is
by numeric index and by name
and you support them well,
that's okay.
For certain classes,
Unique ID is going to be interesting,
but it really had better be unique.
Form Unique ID means I want this thing
regardless of what its index is because
its index may change and what its
name is because its name may change.
I mean, think of this.
If you're writing a script that's
trying to script a finder folder,
you're going to have to
write a finder folder.
And you want to change its name.
And when you change its name,
its index changes in the list
because the finder automatically
resorts the list by name.
How are you going to refer to that
thing again if you've changed its name?
And if you don't know what the name is
and don't know what the new index is,
you're really going to need
to hold on to something,
and that's what the Unique ID is for.
So what you'd write in the finder
is set X to ID of folder foo.
Set name of folder foo to... bar.
And then it's no longer folder foo,
it's folder bar.
And its index is different,
but the ID is the same.
And then you can say folder ID M,
and you'll be able to
work on that folder again.
Those are the simple key forms.
The more complex ones
to handle are before,
after another element,
that's relative position.
This is how you insert things in
the list or append things to a list.
It's usually used with text.
That's form relative position.
And form relative position is
basically a tuple of an absolute
position or any other reference,
any other object specifier.
And then a tag that says before or after.
As a range of items is a pair of the
start element and the stop element,
which both can be any
arbitrary object specifiers.
And that's how you do page
one through three in Quark,
for example.
And then satisfying a test,
which is the most interesting one.
It's every folder whose name
starts with or ends with .jpg.
A very useful thing to do in the finder.
That's the form test and the form whose.
In order to make your object model
really usable by all of these,
all of these key forms can be
compiled by the Apple script language.
And so users can use these.
You should document in your scripting
terminology in your dictionary which
objects support which key forms,
just to not mislead people.
Apple script will pay
no attention to that.
It will try to compile all of
these key forms regardless of
what you say in your terminology.
It will generate these object specifiers.
It will send you a message that says,
"This is a good idea.
I'm going to use this."
And then you can use it to make
your application scriptable.
So, you can use this.
And then you can send them
to your application and your
application will either say,
"I don't support this key
form," or do it right.
Now too often, applications don't say,
"I don't support this key form,"
and they don't do it right.
And they just take a wild
stab and return an error.
And what we--if there's one
thing I'd like to come out of
this session is people at least
being honest with scripters,
both in their terminology
and in their implementation,
what key forms are
supported on what objects.
And that's a hard thing to do because
you have to be honest with the scripter.
have to know them all and
know all their combinations.
Because all of the example,
users can come up with wonderful,
wonderful phrases in AppleScript that
your application just can't handle.
Like, name of every track of movie
one who's enabled is true.
Or modification date of every file
of folders one through two of every
folder whose name starts with A.
All of these generate
valid object specifiers.
And your application,
if you say you've got an object model
and you've got all these objects,
you should be able to
handle things like this.
How do you handle this?
The process of handling these is
something called object resolution.
And basically,
when an event comes in and there's
an object specifier in its parameter,
your first task is to resolve that
object to some indication of what
the thing is in your application that
that object specifier represents.
What you have to do is you have
to descend in the structure
until you find that from null,
which means, oh, that's the root object.
And then you have to back out,
looking at each key form
and selection data in turn,
and then maybe walking back down and
doing it again if it's like a range form
and you need to descend into those object
specifiers and figure out what they mean.
Descending from that root,
just basically unpack the object
specifier until you get back to the O.
And what they eventually want
is the modification date or
the file or the whatever.
So when you walk in,
you find null and then you walk out
until you get to the outermost object
specifier and then you're done.
But that's a hard process.
It's recursive and it's got
a lot of different cases.
Sometimes, the intermediate thing that's
generated will be a list,
like a range, so that at the next level,
you have to iterate over that
range and do the same thing to it,
like the modification date of every file.
You can find every file and then you
have to iterate over every file to
get the modification date of that.
There are a lot of rules
that you have to follow.
have to follow in order to do it right.
They're arbitrarily complex.
You have to have basically a
three-dimensional matrix of switch cases.
You have to have a switch for
every containment relationship.
every key form supported by
each containment relationship.
And you have to have a switch
for every potential data
type of the selection data.
You know,
the form name could have a name.
It could have--the absolute
position could be an integer.
The absolute position could be
something other than an integer.
Your ranges could be object specifiers.
They could be absolute position.
And there are no good general rules about
how to handle the weird corner cases.
A lot of this stuff isn't
written down anywhere.
[Transcript missing]
So what do you do if it's so hard,
if it's so complicated,
and the system software
gives you so little support?
What do you do?
Well, you do it badly,
which is what most of you have done.
And I don't blame you.
But there are tools now
that help you do it well.
If you're scripting with the framework,
the general process is that
you create model objects in C++
that reflect your user's view,
your scripter's view of your application.
So if you have a graphic object concept
that a user can draw a graphic object,
you make a graphic object class in C++.
And maybe you don't really
have a graphic object class
in C++ in your implementation,
but just create one whose implementation
then specializes to circle,
square, line, or whatever.
But create something that
you can hang off scripting.
Then the general paradigm,
and this is used in almost every
framework that offers scriptability,
is that any incoming event,
like make new, delete, move, whatever,
that operates on an object will become a
call to a member function on that object.
And any Apple event properties,
like the size, the dimensions,
the visible, the color,
that a scripter can get at,
are just represented as
data members of that object.
And then your element,
your containment relationships,
become collection class
collections on that object.
And so basically what you do is,
what I'd recommend doing is
you start with your user model.
Create your terminology.
Then design a bunch of C++ objects that
implement a C++ view of that terminology.
Wire them up on the top side to the
scripting engine of that framework,
on the bottom side to your
actual implementation object,
and then try it out and see how it works.
And you may have to do a little
tuning to get it all right.
But that's the order that
I really recommend you start in.
Start from the user model
of your application.
Design your scripting terminology.
Implement C++ objects that are
structured like that terminology.
Then wire them up to
the scripting engine,
and then wire them to your
actual implementation,
so that the script commands can
flow all the way from the scripter's
view of the world to your actual
objects in your C++ application.
And so this is how it
works in PowerPlant.
If you get PowerPlant off the shelf,
and this has been true for years,
what you can do is if you have
a C++ class and you derive it
from the L model object class,
that becomes the equivalent of an
Apple event object model class.
And so in your terminology,
if it has class window,
if you look in PowerPlant,
the window class in PowerPlant
derives from L model object,
and so it looks like a
window to AppleScript,
the AppleScript window class.
The events are member functions,
so just as the window L model
object in PowerPlant has a lot
of internal C++ method functions,
that
member functions that it responds to.
It also responds to member functions
that correlate to the standard
suite of Apple event objects.
Make new, delete, for Windows it's close,
Save, Save As.
So there's a correlation between
the events that come in and the
member functions on that class.
The parameters are arguments
to those member functions.
Properties of objects correlate to
the data members on those classes.
PowerPlant implements the
containment relationships using their
collection classes called LLists.
And so everything,
every object that descends from
LModelObject has a number of LList,
has basically an LList attached to it,
which is all the things
that that object contains.
And so a window,
if you have a window that's
populated with widgets,
and widgets also descend
from LModelObject,
then your window class is going to
have an LList of widget objects.
And then each widget object
is going to have a data member
that's called mSuperModel,
and that's going to be
the window it belongs to.
So that's how you do the
containment relationship with
the LList on the container and
the mSuperModel on the contained.
And this makes it very,
very easy once you have your object
model designed and your terminology
designed to go in and write all
these C++ classes that derive from
L model object and have L lists
and have M supermodel data members.
And that makes your internal
structure resemble the
terminology that you've defined.
And PowerPlant helps you out
a lot in this by doing some
of the stuff automatically,
especially the event registration.
Basically, first you start with your
terminology resource.
And I hope all of you have learned how to
create and edit a terminology resource.
We could have a special clinic just
on that because it's pretty hard.
But you add an Apple event object
model class to your terminology
resource and you invent a
four-character code for your class.
A WIDG for your widget.
Then you create the C++ class that has
L model object as a public ancestor.
And then you redefine the
constructor on your WIDG object,
on your widget object.
So it takes an L model object
reference to its container.
And you pass that pointer to
the L model object constructor.
And when somebody says make new widget...
Your constructor gets called,
and it just happens automatically.
It's very nice.
It's a very clean system.
In the constructor,
you set the model kind to that
four character code that you've
defined in your terminology,
and that's how it gets linked.
And then in each container that
has that class as an element,
this is the containment relationship,
you call set uses submodel list to true,
and that says, oh, I'm a container.
I contain these things.
And then you'll get method calls,
you'll get member function
calls on your objects that
correspond to Apple event calls.
So it's sort of like handle,
if somebody makes a new thing of you,
like if you say make new widget,
that container object will get
a call handle create element.
And that says, oh, you know,
this container, the window,
wants a new widget created in it.
Then there you go.
Here's the new widget
object that's been created.
Here's the container that
it's being created in.
Do what you need to do in your
low-level code to draw it or initialize
it or whatever you need to do.
Once the object exists,
then getting and setting the class
properties are very straightforward.
You, again,
define your properties in your AETE.
You create a four-character code
for each property on each object.
And then there's a method on
each class called getAEProperty.
You just override that method,
and you switch off the
four-character code,
and there you go.
So if you have a widget that has color,
size, shape property,
you have three four-character
codes for those.
Your getAEProperty method will
be called on your widget class.
It'll be called with the parameter
that is the property code.
You just switch off that and say, oh,
if I'm getting the size, I return this.
If I'm getting the shape, I return this.
If I'm getting the color, I return this.
Then you can go in and do
the appropriate manipulation.
To get the right data,
you create an AEDesk with the value.
And then you return that as the
return value of getAEProperty.
It's very straightforward again.
Here's an example of it.
I mean, you switch on the in property,
do three cases.
This is contents filled and line width,
for example.
And you just get the appropriate
value straight from the object,
or you synthesize it if it's necessary.
And then you call aecreateDesk to
put it into the right form that
correlates to the class that you
defined it as in your terminology.
You know, if your terminology said that
your contents are a QD rectangle,
R-E-C-T, then you'd better return
it as a rectangle.
That would be good.
Setting class properties is similar.
What's going to come in to your
setAeproperty is a property
switch and a value in an Aedesk.
You write a switch statement that
switches off the in property.
Then you extract the value
from the Aedesk and coerce it,
if necessary, to the right one.
And then you set it.
And if it can't be set,
you return an error.
If the set is successful,
then you return silently.
So here's a set AE property switch.
Notice something in here.
There's a refresh call.
Basically,
if your application has a user interface,
when a scripter sets
properties on an object,
you may want to update
your visual display.
You may want your model to talk
to your view to refresh the image.
If somebody set the bounds of something,
you wanted to redraw it.
So you have to call refresh to redraw it.
How do key forms work in PowerPlant?
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Because L lists are indexed lists,
PowerPlant knows how to get
widget four of window two,
because it just goes down the L list
and gets the fourth widget from
that and sends them to that object.
Form name works if you
have a P name property.
It's special case if you
have a name property,
form name works.
But everything else you
really have to do yourself.
There's this method called get model
token self which passes in the key
form and you pretty much have to
figure out from there how it works.
Mostly they're pretty easy.
There's some sample code on the web,
I can give you a reference to it,
that implements form range.
Doesn't implement it well,
but it basically implements it.
What's the key form?
L lists are indexed lists.
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Because L lists are indexed lists.
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Because L lists are indexed lists.
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Because L lists are indexed lists.
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Because L lists are indexed lists.
PowerPlant implements
most key forms for free.
Form unique ID is fairly straightforward.
Whose clauses are kind
of difficult though?
And how do events work?
Well, the good news is that
PowerPlant implements,
exists, make, delete, count, duplicate,
and move, the basic standard events,
for any object that
descends from lmodelobject.
So these come for free,
which is really nice.
You just have to implement the
constructors and destructors.
Duplicate is fairly simple.
The difficult part for duplicate is
that you've got to set the initial,
like make new, you've got to set the
appropriate initial values for,
so for duplicate, you've got to get the,
you've got to get the initial
values for the initial values.
Get the properties that are
important of the object you're
duplicating and then set them.
You know, if you duplicate an object,
all the properties are
not going to be identical.
The index will be different.
The unique ID will be different,
for example.
So, if you're duplicating a widget,
you need to get the important
properties of widget,
of the old widget,
and then set the properties
of the new widget to that set,
skipping the ones that
are defined to be unique,
like the name perhaps, like the index,
like the unique ID.
And then you've got to handle
createElement event in each container.
You know,
create has to happen in two place.
If you're creating a widget in a window,
the widget has to know
it's being created.
And the window has to know that a new
widget has been created in it in order
to get all the updating to happen right.
Here's some code,
and this will be on the slides
on the CD if you want to read it,
if it's too hard to read up here.
But basically,
this is the create element event.
You switch on what class you're creating.
If your container can handle multiple
different classes created in it,
then if it's...
If you get a create event to create this,
then you do a new that.
If it's that, then you do a new this.
If it's not, then you throw an error.
Now what about custom events?
I mean, it's all well and good to have
an application that is just
objects in the standard events.
And I really,
really applaud you if you can make
an application that is nothing but
objects in the standard events.
But you might want to do
your own custom event.
I mean, the finder does for like
restart and shut down.
That's pretty easy too.
Once again,
you start by defining the events
in your terminology resource and
inventing a four character code.
And it's actually a pair
of four character codes,
the event class and the event type.
What you do in PowerPlant is PowerPlant
has a resource called the AEDT resource.
And the AEDT resource is nothing but a
table that maps event class code pairs.
Okay.
To long ends.
And that's all it is.
It's just a table of event
class code and long end.
And what happens is
That when an Apple event comes
into a PowerPlant application,
it gets looked up in this table,
the long end is generated,
and then you switch off of that long end.
Because it's too hard to
switch off of two 4K codes,
so it basically switches
off the long end.
So if you want to create a custom event,
you know, like a refresh event
or something like that,
you invent the class creator code for it,
you associate it with a number,
and then in the switch
statement in handleAppleEvent,
you switch off of that number,
and then when that case is called,
you just execute your code there.
And you do that on every object
that can handle that event.
So if every object has
its own refresh event,
you might want to have that
handleAppleEvent method and have that
case in the handleAppleEvent method for
each object that handles a refresh event.
Or you might want to have it,
for example, if you've got a number of
objects that can be refreshed,
you might want to just do it once
and have all the other refreshable
objects inherit from that so that you
just assume the inherited capability.
And in many of the cases
for the standard events,
that's exactly what PowerPlant does,
is it doesn't implement
it in the object itself,
but it just hands it off to the
class that it inherits from.
So here's an example.
Here's a rotate event.
You switch on the AppleEvent number.
If the case is 8erotate,
then you call rotate.
If not, then you call the inherited
handleAppleEvent so that you pass it up.
to the superclass to
see if it can handle it.
Here's some things to
remember about PowerPlant.
Number one is that
PowerPlant applications are, by default,
scriptable in the most
stupid possible way,
in that they support a small number of
standard events on the window class only,
but they expose a full,
in some cases too full,
Apple event terminology that promises
more than it actually delivers.
So, for example,
if you just build the demo
PowerPlant application,
it says it supports make new, delete,
count, create, whatever,
on a whole bunch of objects,
and none of that support
is actually in the code,
and that's bad.
So the first thing I want you to do is
to trim or throw away the terminology
resource in your PowerPlant application.
Treat it as if it's just... You know,
start from scratch.
design your scriptability,
then write a terminology
resource from scratch,
and then implement that
terminology that you've defined.
Because if you don't do that,
what's going to happen is that
the default terminology resource
that gets compiled into your
Power Plant application is going
to promise that it supports all
these events on all these objects,
which just aren't there.
And it's a source of great frustration
for a lot of scripters that,
you know, they get a new application and
the first thing they do is they
drag it onto the script editor
to see whether it's scriptable.
And this dictionary
pops up and it's great.
Oh, look at all these events.
They're the standard suite.
They've got all these objects.
And you look at it and
it's just Power Plant.
And that's all it is.
And then you know it's not going to work.
So please trim your
Power Plant dictionary.
The second thing is,
I cannot possibly do PowerPlant
scripting justice in the time
I have in this presentation.
But luckily,
on CodeWarrior Pro and actually
every version of CodeWarrior
back for several years,
there's been a very good introduction
to doing scriptability in PowerPlant.
In the PowerPlant Advanced Topics
book that's in PDF form on the
PowerPlant documentation CD,
in the CodeWarrior documentation CD.
It's there.
It's good.
Read it.
Study it.
These slides were basically
stolen shamelessly from there.
It's good documentation and it
will help get your head around
the whole Apple Events thing.
So, if you want to code in PowerPlant,
go to PowerPlant Advanced Topics,
trim the AET resource,
start with designing what
you want the user to see,
build your terminology,
build some C++ objects that reflect that,
then wire them up.
Both to the scripting interface
through L model object and then
to your actual implementation.
That's the way to go about it.
But what if I don't
want to use PowerPlant?
Well, you've got options.
One of the things you can do is you
can manually extract LModelObject
and the LList class and some of the
other classes that are hanging on.
You can just extract them from PowerPlant
and compile them into your application.
Now there are a lot of little threads
that you may have to pick up of
things that PowerPlant depends upon,
but the PowerPlant classes are
extractable from PowerPlant itself.
So you don't have to
use their window model.
You don't have to use
their drawing model,
their load and save model.
You can just extract the classes
and adapt them and use them as
a model in your own application.
Could be a lot of work,
but it does save you a lot of work.
So that's one thing you can do.
There's another framework,
an old venerable framework called
Sprocket by Steve Sissick that hasn't
been updated for I guess four years now,
but it's still available
online at CodeWell.com,
I believe.
And it supports some decent
Apple event scripting.
It's some helper classes.
There's a lot of other things that
help you get your head around it.
It's not terribly up to date,
but it's a start.
If you want to commit to
using Objective-C or Java and
deploying on MacOSX only,
you can use the Cocoa framework.
There's some very good
scriptability in Cocoa,
and you can go to the
Cocoa Advanced Topics presentation,
which is at 3 o'clock today,
to talk about that.
Or you can use the Mac App Framework,
and I'm sure Tom Becker will be very
happy to show you what scriptability
is in the Mac App Framework.
But there's one more opportunity,
which has just presented itself,
coming from our DTS group called MoreOSL.
MoreOSL is not a framework per se.
It's more like a support
library that you can use from a
C application or a C++ application.
It's carbon-ready,
which if you want to deploy on
MacOS 9 and MacOSX is very nice.
It'll get you there faster.
And it deploys all the way
back to MacOS 8.5 and compiles
all the way back to Cocoa.
And it's also available
on the CodeWarrior Pro 2.
So those of you who are sticking back
on earlier versions of CodeWarrior and
don't want to use the latest and greatest
are not cut off from this functionality.
It supports, it really does support
doing a good object model.
I really like the way that
it goes about doing it.
And it's comprehensive, it's tested,
and it comes with a good sample
application that shows you how it works.
And I'm going to be demoing
that in a little while.
You can get it on developer.apple.com
slash sample code.
It's a little bit more expensive.
It's a little deeper in there,
but at the moment there's
a top-level link to it.
Very small, quick download.
Go for it.
Here's the theory of operation.
It's a little different from the
way the PowerPlant thing works.
You have to define your user
classes and your user events,
and I recommend you do that the same way.
You start with the user model,
and then you define your terminology,
and figure out what your
object model classes and object
model events are going to be.
But then you make tables.
You make a table of all your classes,
and you make a table of all your events,
and then you make a table for each class
of what events apply to that class.
and you build those
in straight C structs.
Fans of straight C structs.
You create an event table entry
for each event on each class.
And it maps the event codes to
the classes they operate on.
And then it also has some bits
that declare what's supposed to
happen with the direct parameter,
whether it's required or optional,
whether this generates a reply or not,
things like that.
So you set a couple
flags in these tables.
So basically,
the first thing your application
does is creates all these tables
that defines its scriptability.
Then, you, then,
more OSL does all of the registry
with the object support library and
with the Apple event handler for you.
It registers its handlers,
so you don't have to.
So, when an event handler gets called
or an object accessor gets called,
more OSL takes control,
and it will call back
to you when it needs to,
but you don't have to interact
directly with the operating system,
which is very nice.
And in many cases, the generic handlers,
the generic event handlers from
MoreOSL will do what you want
with no further intervention,
which is actually pretty cool.
When your application
processes an Apple event,
MoreOSL resolves the direct parameter.
It calls OSA Resolve for you.
It dispatches the event to the event
handler for your class directly.
It's class-first dispatching.
It's the right way to do it.
And then the generic handler handles the
event unless you've defined a specific
handler for that event on your class,
in which case your specific
handler gets called.
So let me show you just
basically a class table entry.
There are three main parts to it.
There's an event ID, which is, you know,
here's the event that's coming in.
And then a couple of
pointers to other tables,
a table for the properties and a table
for all the events on that class.
And then for each class,
you must supply a couple
of callback routines.
And you can supply others and just leave
them null if you're not supplying them.
For each class,
you must write a counter routine
that counts how many of those
classes there are in a container.
And then you can provide accessors
that are get a class by unique ID.
You know,
get me from my container by unique ID,
by index, by name.
And then there's get
me or something of me.
There's a set me or something of me.
And then there's a coerced token.
And the tokens are pretty much
the way that the OSL works.
The token is a representation
of the internal object.
And tokens in more OSL are
basically just pointers.
They can be a class pointer.
They can be a pointer.
They can be a handle.
But it's basically 32 bits that uniquely
identify something in your application.
So then there's an event table entry,
and the event table is
very straightforward.
It's just the four character codes
for the event and the event class,
whether or not the direct
object is required,
and whether or not there's a result
and what action to take on the result.
And then in each class,
there's a table for where's the
handler for the exists event,
the count event, the get data event,
and the set data event.
And then as you add more custom
events to the event table,
you have to provide corresponding
events in the class event handlers.
I mean, it's really dumb dispatching.
The event table, the master one,
and every class event table
have to be in parallel.
That is, if you add a rotate event
to the event table entry,
you have to add a rotate
event in the same position
in every class event handler,
even if many of them are null
because you can't rotate those.
But the one you have,
one that does support rotate,
that's the pointer to the rotate routine.
Okay?
So the class event handler table
should look like the event table
entry customized for each class.
And then the property table off of
each class is very straightforward.
It's property code and a bunch
of flags that say what it does.
And the property access is actually done
through the class's getter setter event
with the same kind of switch statement.
If you provide a pproperties property,
a properties property
in your terminology,
which is the way things are done now,
more OSL will automatically iterate over
all of the properties in your property
table and get them or set them on NAS,
which is great.
It saves you the trouble of doing that.
If you provide a pinherits property
in your terminology and you put
it in your property table entry,
more OSL will automatically look in
your container classes for properties
that you don't support directly.
So if I have, like in the finder,
there's an item and a file.
And items have names.
Files don't have names.
Files have modification dates,
but they inherit names.
So in the... In more OSL parlance,
there won't be a property table
entry for name in the file object.
And more OSL will see
the inherits and say,
"Oh,
if I'm looking for the name property,
I don't look in the file object.
I look in the item object
that it inherits from,
and it'll do the right thing for
you." Which is really very nice.
In terms of event handler,
moreOSL does exist, count, getObject,
and setObject for you.
It implements those generically,
and in most cases,
you really won't need to do anything
to change or override those.
Most of the key forms are
handled automatically,
and this is good for two reasons.
One is that you just don't have
to implement like form range and
several of the form test cases.
And second is you can read the source
code and see how it ought to work,
if you so desire to see
how it ought to work.
It's really great.
The only one that's not handled
automatically in the current version
of OSL is the form relative position,
before, after an event.
Let me talk a little bit about tokens.
Like I said,
tokens are the way that you relate
a resolved object specifier to
something in your application.
And a token is basically a token code,
an object code, a property code,
and then a pointer to something.
And this is a simple token definition.
That pointer to something
can be like a window pointer,
a pointer to a toolbox structure.
It can be a pointer to one of
your C or C++ data structures,
or it can be a C++ object.
It's just 32 bits that your application,
if given a pointer, can say, oh,
this is a pointer,
and the object code reminds
me what it's a pointer to.
That means I can do
something with this data.
I can create it, I can delete it,
I can get information from it, whatever.
The only important thing about a
pointer is that your application
understands what it is.
A token.
Tokens never leave your app.
They're never sent back to Apple Script.
They're never sent to anybody else.
So all that a token has to
do is be creatable by and
understandable by your application.
Properties, getters and setters.
It's very straightforward.
If somebody gives you a property token,
your getter ought to return
an appropriate value.
If somebody says,
I want this property of this object,
you've got to return an
AEDesk that's that value.
That's all there is to it.
Setter, the same thing.
If somebody says,
here's a token of an object,
here's the property,
and here's the new value
I want you to set it to,
you should set that property somewhere in
your application and return error or no.
That's all you need to do.
If there are other
parameters on an Apple event,
you have to extract them manually
with good old AE Get Param Desk.
And there's a useful more
OSL routine to coerce it.
If it happens to be an object specifier,
it'll do the resolution for you.
You know,
this is useful for things like set
name of file 1 to name of file 2.
In that case,
the 2 parameter is an object specifier,
name of file 2.
And so what happens is the set command
will resolve the direct parameter
name of object 1 and give you a token.
And then it'll be set
token to object specifier.
And then your setter will have to say,
well, you know,
I don't know what this is.
It's an object specifier.
So you hand it off to coerce object,
MOSL coerce object desk.
And it will take the 2 parameter,
the object specifier.
And it will call back inside
your application and resolve
that and get the name of file 2.
And return the string and say, okay,
this is what you should set it to.
Set name of,
set this token to this string.
And then you just do it because
then you know what it is.
More OSL does deep object resolution,
which is really cool.
It's for cases like...
First file of every folder of every disk.
That's going to be a list.
And what that's going to be
a list of is on every disk,
for every folder at the
top level of every disk,
you want the first file
of each of those folders.
Or the name of the first file
And so,
MoroSL has an object resolution algorithm
that goes deep into those structures
and creates one long list from that.
We could go into it.
It's well documented in
the MoroSL documentation.
So, without further ado,
if we could have demo machine one up.
Great.
When you download more OSL,
one of the first things you
notice is you get a lot of the
more is better classes with you.
You get more Apple events, more Windows,
more text utils.
The demo application
relies on a bunch of those.
But there are two main things.
The more OSL files, relatively small.
Most of the work is done in this
140k text file called moreOSL.c.
There are a couple of separate
files for the string comparisons,
which are A, heinous, and B,
the cause of many bug reports,
which Quinn has filed,
basically saying AppleScript should
either do this itself or
have callbacks to do this,
because as you might know,
it's very hard for your application
to do string comparisons the same way
AppleScript does string comparisons,
and that can be unexpected to users.
So we're taking that feedback and
trying to do something with it.
There's a a a small source
code file to manipulate tokens,
small source code file
that's some helper routines,
but really,
moreOSL is itself a relatively
small piece of code.
The second thing you'll find is a
fully functional test application
in CodeWarrior called testmoreOSL,
and the delightful thing about this is
it has almost no user interface at all.
So you won't be tempted to
try to play with the UI.
It is mostly a scriptable application.
And so if we um go to CodeWarrior,
and open up should have moreOSL,
testmoreOSL.com.
Here's the test application,
and there's one source file for the test
application and a terminology resource,
and that's about it.
And then the rest are
the more OSL sources.
And the test application is one file,
and what it does is it
creates a model of a,
you have the application,
the application has windows,
and each window can have nodes in it,
and nodes are just simple rectangles,
and nodes can have subnodes in them.
And that is the user model.
So what we did was we
created a user model,
windows, nodes, subnodes.
Then did a terminology for it and came up
with all the appropriate four-character
codes for all of the events and
the class and things like that.
And then built those tables and wrote
those accessors like we talked about.
So, for example,
in the testmoreosl.c file, here's the,
here are all of the
routines on the application,
because the application contains windows.
There's a getter, setter, counter,
and access by index routine,
and those are listed in
its appropriate tables.
There's the events it handles, open,
reopen, open document, quit, and make.
So basically you have one
routine for the getter,
setter, counter, and access,
and then one routine
for each event it takes.
And the routines are pretty simple.
So here's the application getter.
I thought I'd set the text size on this.
I hit power plant.
There we go.
So here's your application getter,
and it gets a token in,
and if the token is a property,
then you switch on that property,
and if it's the version,
then you get the version
property and return it.
If it's a unique ID,
then you return a unique ID.
And otherwise, you say, no such object.
It's a very simple getter.
So then there's a window class,
and the window has its getter setter,
and its event it responds to,
which is close.
And so here's the handler
for the window close event,
which is basically--
handles the saving in parameter,
so it gets that, and then
closes the window with or
without the save options.
It's a very simple handler.
So here's the document inside the window,
and the document handles make new.
And so this routine handles the...
make event when it determines
we want to make a document.
And it creates a new properties record.
And this actually uses more of the
more is better window classes in order
to put the window up on the screen.
But it basically creates
the classes for that.
And then here are some
of the custom objects.
Here's the node.
And here's your node access by index.
Since more OSL doesn't have
like an L list structure,
it has to manage its own
data structures itself.
It doesn't have collection
classes to fall back on.
So it just basically has
an index list of nodes,
which are node pointers.
And then it finds it by index.
And if it doesn't find it,
then it says it doesn't have an L list.
of this type.
So you can see that once you
set up the more OSL structure,
actually implementing the Apple event
and object model handling,
it's very straightforward.
For every event and these specific
things you have to do for every class,
you write one routine whose inputs
are these and outputs are these,
and then the rest of the stuff is
just basically handled for you,
and it makes it a lot simpler.
Let me show you this in action.
Is it running?
We'll debug this.
and run it.
And we can open up the script.
One of the things I love about
this is that it comes with
a test script which has some
particularly heinous cases in it.
I mean it ba--it really
ex--exercises most of the code paths
with--within the test application
and within MoreOSL itself.
So, for example,
here's a lot of things that
you should be able to send from
AppleScript to your application
and have your application handle.
You know,
set frontmost of window to true and make
new document with properties and set
position of node dis--set position of
some element of some document to a list.
Make a new window with properties.
You know,
these are a bunch of things that you
should support in your code if you have
classes that support--that support them.
And so we're going to open
up the event log here,
show the event results.
Let's compile this
against the application.
There are a lot of test cases in here.
It's a big script.
And we're going to execute
it against that application.
And here are all the test
cases we're going to run.
and we're going to run it before
the Apple event times out.
And you can see as they scroll by,
here are a whole lot of object model
events going to this application.
There's getters, there's setters,
there's create new, there's delete,
there's move, there's duplicate.
And that relatively simple application,
okay, it doesn't do anything with nodes,
it does very little with Windows,
but that relatively simple
application is handling all of these
Apple events and handling them well.
You can see some of the
stuff we're doing here.
Set the properties property of a
window to a list of properties,
which is nice.
Set names of windows,
get names of startup disks, exist files.
Get ID of Last window.
Here, the sum key form,
which is supposedly take a random
element from this list of element,
that's fully implemented.
So if we can go back
to the slide machine,
and we'll wrap up here.
Some other nice things about it.
The application and window
classes are populated,
so if you're using the other
more is better window classes,
then you can just get that functionality
for free for things like normal
application and window properties.
And it knows about file objects,
which are another thing that
Quinn filed a lot of bugs on,
is that sometimes AppleScript will
send your application queries
about system-wide objects,
like the name of a file given an FS spec.
And it expects you to handle that,
to be able to get the name
of an FS spec and return it.
And if you don't know that
you're supposed to do that,
and nobody tells you
it's a pain in the butt,
and it will result in a user bug report.
But.
More OSL does that for you.
Okay.
Here's some notable omissions.
There's really no object management.
Like I said, there are no collection
classes for your objects,
so you need to manage
your objects yourself,
and you need to have the
actual routines to do make,
new, delete, move,
and duplicate the objects yourself.
I mean, the routines will call you,
but since it's not C++,
it's not going to fire off constructors
and destructors automatically.
You have to write that code yourself.
The print event is not implemented.
Selection.
And insertion points.
Generally,
the text classes are not supported.
You'll have to do that yourself.
Like I said,
form relative position isn't implemented,
but we're going to try to twist
somebody's arm to get that in.
And no support for things like
properties of a built-in type.
Like if the result of a
get operation is a string,
and you ask for the class of that,
if you ask for class of
version of application,
it won't handle that right.
But then again, I don't know.
I know of relatively few
applications that do.
And it also doesn't support
class properties whose
values are records or lists.
And that's a philosophical decision,
and we're going to have a
philosophical discussion about it.
So, in summary,
if you want to use PowerPlant,
PowerPlant can provide easy scripting
for your scriptable application.
There are some things, you know,
a lot of things you have to do yourself.
But you can really get
started by just overriding,
you know, inheriting from,
descending from LL object and
overriding a few handlers,
and you can get a scripting
implementation started.
What I really recommend you
do is you trash the default
dictionary implementation,
and you start from the beginning
rather than just trying to,
like, monkey with the sample application.
For more OSL, if you don't have a
framework-based application,
this is really most appropriate for it.
It's the fastest way
to get the basics done,
because all you do is
write a few handlers,
install them in tables, and there you go.
It assumes you're doing
your own object management,
which most of you are doing anyway.
And it's very well commented
and very well tested.
And we have some investment in it,
in that when we come out with a new
dictate of how a new AppleScript feature
is supposed to be implemented,
like a properties property,
we'll try to get that into
more OSL as sample code.
We have a couple of sessions coming
up in a very short period of time.
I think it's at 3:30.
A feedback forum across the hall,
way on the other end,
for general feedback on AppleScript.
If you want to know more about
doing scripting in Cocoa,
you should go to the
Cocoa in-depth session instead,
which is across the street
at the Civic Auditorium.
A long walk, too bad,
but Mike Ferris will give you a good show
on what you can do in Cocoa scripting.
Same contact information
for the last presentation,
but for Code Warrior and PowerPlant,
I recommend you contact
Metrowerk's technical support.
And for questions about more OSL,
DTS at Apple.com.
Thanks very much for your attention.
Yes?
Yes.